The James Clayton Lecture is a special lecture.
There are a series of lectures which are endowed under the will of the late James Clayton
of Turkey, who is an active member of this institution from 1901 to 1944 and to whose
generosity were greatly indebted. The Foundation enables the Institution Council to invite distinguished
engineers or scientists to present a lecture on any subject of importance to the engineering
profession at an opportunity such as this. I have very great pleasure introducing Mr. Gerald
D. Griffin, our lecturer tonight, who took up the post of Director of the NASA Lyndon
B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas just about a year ago. He was born in Athens,
Texas on the Christmas Day, 1934, and received a bachelor's degree in air and optical engineering
from the Texas University Agricultural and Mechanical College, and that was in 1956. He served
four years as an officer in the U.S. Air Force. After the service, he was an air space engineer
with Douglas aircraft, Lockheed Missile and Space Company, and General Dynamics. Mr.
Griffin first joined NASA in 1964, and he joined it at the Johnson Space Center at that time
towards the manned Spacecraft Center, and he was a flight director on all of the 11 Apollo
missions. He was lead flight director on Apollo 12, on Apollo 15, and Apollo 17.
He also involved in all the Gemini flights as a flight controller. During 1976 to 1977, Mr.
Griffin was deputy director of the Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards in California.
Following this post, he was appointed deputy director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida,
between July 1980 and June 1981. Concurrently, served as associate administrator for external
relations in NASA headquarters at Washington, DC. Mr. Griffin left NASA for a year to become
vice president for systems engineering and management at Scott Science and Technology
Inc. of Lancaster, California. This he did until taking up his current position with NASA
in August 1982. Ladies and gentlemen, it is my greatest pleasure, honor to ask Mr.
Griffin present his lecture tonight.
Thank you, Mr. President. It's a great honor to be here as I toured the institution
this afternoon. I couldn't help but think what had happened within the confines of this
building in the last 137 years or so. And it's a great privilege to just be able to be
here with you and get the feeling of that community that has been so much to the world in what
has emanated from these confines. I thank you for your kind introduction, Mr. President.
Every time I hear that, I'm quite often wondering if the audience might get the impression
I have trouble holding a job. I've moved around quite a bit and it's been a great deal
of fun. And when I left NASA in 1981, I thought I'd probably never see it again. And I had
been home barely a year when I was asked to come back and be the director of the Johnson
Space Center and I could not stop that call. I had to do it. And it's been an extremely
interesting two years. We are at what I would call a pivotal point in the American Space
Program. Maybe I should say even the free world space program because it truly is an
international flavor now. Granted, we are still in the center of it in the states but the
tentacles are reaching further and further each day. And I am sure that in the next decade,
the free world will join together even more than we ever have before to do some many and
very exciting things in space. I want to talk tonight about the shuttle. Primarily,
it's engineering aspects. I decided that rather than reading my paper verbatim that I wanted
to expand it to some degree and I'll do that, I also will be using some charts that you
haven't, if you have a copy of the paper and I'm in there. But I felt it was important to zero
in on a couple of areas that I thought this audience particularly might like to hear about.
We are in an infant stage with space shuttle. Despite what you hear in the press sometimes,
it's going very well. We have flown all of 12 times and as most of you, I suspect many of you
have been involved in complex programs of one kind or another, that has not given us all the
answers yet that we will need and a number of flights will have to be continued before we have
all of the engineering answers and we'll have some problems yet that we will have to face. But for
a system as large and complex as it is, we are quite happy with the first 12 flights and I think
that in the next year or so, we will close out most of the nagging, let me call it that,
kinds of issues that are still facing us today. I'm going to, the presentation is broken into
several pieces. I'm going to start with an overview of the program because I want to make sure that
we all begin at the same starting point. I use these two slides to try to give you a feel for those
of you that don't have it, the feel for the size of this vehicle. It is very large. The dimensions,
while I won't read them all, the orbiter is roughly the size of the length of a DC-9.
It has an aspect ratio or a thickness ratio, maybe it's a better term, there will more like a 747.
Very, very large vehicle. When I've shown it, an isometric form on the right just to give you a feel
for the major pieces and they are as follows. The airplane device, we call the orbiter,
the it rests at launch on top of a very large external tank and that external tank carries liquid
oxygen and liquid hydrogen and strapped onto the side of each or each side of the external tank are
two very large solid rocket boosters that the largest we have ever flown in our country.
The total weight of this stack at lift-off is approximately 5.5 million pounds. Give or take
a few. We produce about 6.5 million pounds of thrust at lift-off, which is a slightly smaller
number than we had in Apollo. The Saturn V generated about 7.5 million pounds to give you a measure there.
The perhaps the heart of the system, if one wants to think of it that way, is the space shuttle orbiter.
The orbiter is a very complex avionics machine. Many people think of it more like an airplane,
but let me assure you, and you're going to see this later on, it is a mechanical engineer's dream.
There are more actuators, cranks, pulleys, a structure, just enough to keep
any and all of you very, very happy. I want to give you a feel for the profile of how the mission
is flown before we get into some of the details. And then if you'll refer to this slide, it kind of
goes around in a sequence. We end up landing back at a runway and going back into the launch complex.
This is a picture back in this phase right at the very beginning where we are starting to roll the vehicle
to the pad. And in the next shot, you'll see the vehicle on the crawler transporter headed toward
the launch pad. Now this is a very large piece of machinery. The crawler transporter itself weighs
about 6 million pounds. It's the same crawler transporter that we used in Apollo, and we've got two of them.
They were refurbed. In fact, about the only thing we did to them was replace the soft goods
since Apollo, and it was directly usable in this use. The mobile launcher is the rather
square device that the stack is sitting on. It weighs another 8 million pounds. It in itself is
like a little factory. It's got quite a lot of plumbing and servicing for the vehicle in it.
And then the orbiter sitting on top of there in the dry configuration without any propellants,
and it's another 3 and a half million pounds or so. This brings a total then as we're progressing to
the pad of about 18 million pounds on the roll. It moves at about a half a mile an hour to a
mile per hour, and it's a distance of about three and a half miles. So it's a pretty much a major
part of the day to make the track from the vehicle assembly building out to the launch pad.
The next shot will show you that as it's coming up onto the pad, you can see in this area here,
this is the flame trench, and this home over launcher is moved up on top of the flame trench,
and it's set into place on rather large pastels, and then the crawler is removed. It's hydraulically
lowered, and then it backs back down the pad and gets out of the way. So then the engines are
fully exposed to the flame trench. The next shot is a shot of the vehicle. This happens to be STS-1,
made at night. It's a very pretty sight. It's always lit up very brightly if some of you may have
seen some launches, and they usually occur something roughly like the birth of babies,
seems like late at night or early in the morning. And as it's a beautiful sight, very dynamic,
and I hope some of you can someday, if you haven't seen one, see it sitting there. There's a very
inspiring thing before left off just to see that much energy, harnessed sitting there ready to go
is a real sight. Now the launch phase begins with the ignition of the main engines. There are
three main engines in the rear of the orbiter. They produce about a half million pounds of thrust
each, and each solid rocket produces about two and a half million pounds of thrust. So we start
to main engines about eight minutes, sorry, eight seconds prior to lift off, and as soon as they are
up to thrust and measured correctly, then we send the ignition signal to the solid rocket boosters,
and once that happens it's leaving, even if the hold down bolts don't fire, it's gone.
And we've not had a, that's about a triply redundant system to make sure those bolts fire,
but the vehicle sits on the base of the solid rocket boosters, and there's four attached
posts on each. And as you can imagine, we want to make sure it lets go. So as soon as you'd like
the rocket engine, I'm sorry, the solid rocket engine, you have lift off. On the left, the only
reason I'm not going to repeat any of those numbers there but I wanted to show you that was an artist
rendition of what lift off should look like. It's a, you know, there's a date up in the upper right hand
corner of October 79, and because of some delays in the shuttle, we had to get people to trust us
as that's what it would look like. But finally, on the right, you see the lift off of a real one,
and indeed it looked very much like we had planned. The early launch phase is a very dynamic one,
and the, it happens at about 60 seconds after lift off, we pass through a very high Q, a high dynamic
pressure region. That's about the roughest part of the ride, the astronauts report at that point
that there are some vibrations, some noise, a lot of wind noise even that they can still hear.
And at about two minutes after lift off, the solid rockets are expended. All of their propellant
is burned, and they are jettisoned away from the external tank. And at that point, you still have
the three main engines producing about a half million pounds of thrust each, and the orbiter sitting
on top of this external tank that's feeding those engines with liquid oxygen, a good hybrid.
Now on the left, again, was an artist's condition of what that should look like, and on the right,
you actually see the solid rocket blisters starting to, they had been separated. You can see the three
main engines still burning, and you can see the faint haze of the external tank. This was taken
with a ground-based camera at Patrick Air Force Base, and then you can see the solid rockets have
been jettisoned, and they are still burning some residual, what we call tail-off types of propellant,
but they're producing little to no thrust. And at this point, when they go through about 50%
of thrust, we immediately get off of it because it starts to be more of a drag, and it is a help,
and it thrusts the case very quickly. The next shot is a picture of the booster's tumbling
before they are recovered, and in the next shot, you will see the deployment of the drug parachute.
Here's the drug that is starting to stabilize this one rocket. This drug shoot is 54 feet in
diameter, and it pulls out three main shoots for each rocket that are 115 feet in diameter each,
so that these are the largest parachutes that have ever been built for any operational purpose,
and if that isn't enough on the last flight, we were getting a little water damage in this
afternoon, quite a lot of water damage, because even with 115 foot shoots, we were impacting the
water at about 88 feet per second, roughly 60 miles an hour. So we wanted to sew that down some
more in the last flight. On the right-hand booster, we flew three main parachutes of 136 feet
diameter on each, and we got much reduced velocity at impact, a lot less damage, and so for
the subsequent flights from here on, we're going to fly 136 foot parachutes as the main shoots.
These things land about 122 miles or so down range, and float and are recovered. They float in a
vertical mode. We go in with a nozzle in the bottom, make an airtight seal, blow the air,
blow the water out, replace it with air, and they float horizontally at that point, and we
tow them in to Cape Canaveral. Take them apart, send them back to the factory and get a new one.
It comes apart in several segments, and they are loaded at a fire call in the state of Utah,
but the segments are sent by rail, and then they're sent back to us loaded by rail.
As we go on higher during the launch phase, we finally get to the point where we shut the
main engines off. That's just short of orbital velocity. The reason we do that is because we want
this external tank, which is only piece of the system that's not reusable. We want it to re-enter
the atmosphere, and indeed from the Cape, it does re-enter and go into the Indian Ocean.
Mostly in very small pieces, in fact there's very little of it left. It's very lightweight
structure, only weighs 78,000 pounds empty. As you can see, very large 28 feet in diameter,
as I recall, about 150 feet long. We do a small separation maneuver, which the artist's
rendition on the left shows to get away from the tank. In the right hand picture is the actual
picture of an external tank that was taken from an engineering camera located on the base of
the orbital vehicle as it separated. One of the things that you can see is you can see some,
in the actual photograph, you can see some charring of the rear end. That's because it gets
very hot. This whole tank is covered with what we call Sophie spray-on foam insulation used for
two purposes. One is to these are cryogenic fuels, and we must keep them well-encelated as we
can. It also gives protection to the exit heating that we get. At this point, the orbiter is
moving at a speed of about 25,000 feet per second, and a slightly short of orbital velocity.
With the orbital maneuvering system that's on the, and I'll show you a bit of picture
this later, but it's located in the pod of the vehicle back in the back. Two 6,000 pound
thrusters, we top off the last bit of velocity needed to get into orbit, about 200 feet, or
two to 300 feet more per second. At that point, we're in orbit and ready to go into operation.
In the next chart, I'm going to go back to the sequence chart because I'm going to be discussing now
this orbital operations portion of the flight before I get to the entry. This picture on the right
is a picture of STS-41B, and I'll tell you a story of why that's got such a funny number.
As you know, we had an occasion on Apollo 13 one day when we were headed to the moon,
the oxygen tank blew up, and it's so happened that we launched that vehicle at 13-13 hours,
and there are a number of people that says we probably should never have another spaceship
with the number of 13 attached to it. So we tried to devise a system that's got everyone
thoroughly confused, but we don't have an STS-13. The four, when I say 41 Bravo, STS-4,
that's fiscal year 84. One is launched from the east coast and B is the second mission in the year.
Now if I haven't got you all confused, but now something's wrong. This happens to be a shot on orbit
taken from a spaz spacecraft. This was a spacecraft that was inside the payload bay deployed and
looked back at the orbiter. It was eventually recaptured and put back into the payload bay and
brought home. We'll be fine that payload again incidentally. It was built by the Germans.
Very inexpensively and was a super payload. It was three axis stabilized and very performed very well.
You're looking at the two, to give you an idea, this house two satellites that were deployed
before the shot was taken. Those are sun shields that cover them up to protect them thermally.
And in this picture, they've already been deployed, but those were the two that failed
as they were ignited to go on the higher altitude. And I might add parenthetically that we have now been
working for about six months. This happened in February. We've been working for the last five,
six months on techniques to recover those satellites. And the Indonesians that don't want to have
given us to go ahead. And we think Western Union is going to give us the go ahead. And we're going to
fly a mission month after next, November, where we will go retrieve those satellites, put them back into
cargo bay and bring them back to Earth and return them to their owners. This is a place where we got
some relatively bad press because it always was attached to us. NASA, I mean, actually it was a
commercially developed upper stage. NASA did not have anything to do with that development.
The satellite users chose to use them for price and insurance, et cetera. Those of all
been paid off and it is a good stage. On the last mission, we did fly two more of the same upper
stage mission that just landed and they worked just fine. Interestingly enough, we think the problem
there was with the composite nozzles that these devices use. And we have, the community has figured
out a way to scan those nozzles. In fact, they're using a CAT scan process. It looks like the bringing
scan that can detect voids in the composite and think that's what had happened through a process
era. There had been voids in that and so we've corrected that. The, the own orbit operations
involve, can't involve a great deal of other things. Let me show you a picture of the,
this is the deployment of one of those satellites and I can't tell you which one it is. You can see
the Earth to the left. It has been ejected by springs and it is spinning on its way out of the
orbiter bay. I know you don't get to see much of this on TV anymore but on American television,
we replay these things after they happen. They normally happen out of sight of the station
and we have to dump it on videotape and so we get to see these things happen quite out. We saw
all three satellites that were launched on the last vehicle. Other orbit operations involve,
this is what we call the LDF, standing for long duration exposure facility. It's a 20,000
pound structure that we have put many kinds of materials and components, some electronic
components even on the outer skin of it. We deployed it about six months ago. It will stay in orbit
for a year and then we will go retrieve it, bring it back down in order to conduct studies on
what the space environment does to these kind of materials, long duration exposure.
Obviously if we want our systems to last longer, we will have to make sure that we provide the
right kind of coatings, right kind of protection and we want to know more about the long term effects
of the space environment. This was incidentally built all in-house at NASA. There are some structures,
engineers at Langley Center had a real good time at this. That's the remote manipulator arm that
you see poking out the top. It's actually holding onto it at deployment and then it just let it go.
And it's stabilized by gravity gradient and it's with this long axis pointing it to your.
Another kind of operation we do is our manned operations. A number of EVAs are scheduled
extra vehicular activities are scheduled in the near future. This is a picture of Bruce McCannellus
on the checkout of the man maneuvering unit. It was the first time we had put a man outside
and cutting loose without any tethers. It worked very well and we are in the process now we've
flown another mission since then that's when we repaired the solar max mission. We did have some
problem with recovery device so as a result we finally captured the solar max satellite that we
repaired with the remote manipulator arm with the maneuvering unit work fine. We are going to
on the retrieval mission that I mentioned earlier we will be using the MMU to retrieve the two
satellites that have failed to get into the proper orbit. And the astronaut will have a device
on the front of him we call a stinger which will actually he'll fly out and poke it into the nozzle
of the spent stage on the upper stage and then it has a we call it a molly boat or a lag boat
kind of device that pulls out and then he tightens it down and he drags it back to the shuttle.
At that point he puts a grapple fixture on it, remote arm reaches in and gets it puts it back into
the payload bay. That's what it says here and that's what we're going to try to do.
Fellow that is going to do that is a good friend of some other people here in the hall tonight.
His name is Joe Allen he is a scientist he's also one of the best
EVA specialists that we have so Joe got that assignment he's happy to do it.
All right now I'm coming down the right hand side of the left chart.
As we start to end the mission then what we do is we slow the vehicle down by about 300 feet per second
and that's enough to knock it out of orbit. We do that with those same engines that we toughed off
the orbital velocity with we just turn the vehicle around and fire it backwards.
We do that about 4,400 nautical miles from the landing site. At that time we're back to about
25,000 feet per second and in the early stages of entry as you see depicted by this picture
the angle of attack is like 40 degrees so it's very high.
Here is a picture taken again from a ground-based camera during entry.
This is an altitude of only about 100,000 feet and at this point the vehicle is slowed down it is
a glider that has no power obviously so it's a one-shot landing and it better be right the first time.
The touchdown speed varies from about 180 to 230 knots. There is a very steep descent.
It's a 24 degree glide slope. A standard aircraft is roughly on the order of a degree and a half
two degrees. This is very steep. There's a pre-flare maneuver at about 2500 feet and then he slows
down across the boundary and puts it on the ground. That is worked very well and what I want to do now
is show you a little bit about how the structure is put together in the vehicle. Here's a touchdown
on the lake bed. We go to the lake bed on occasions when we did for all of the landing tests that we
did early in the program because there's a lot of room for error and it turns out we didn't need
much on the way and it all worked well. We also go to the lake bed for the first flight of any new
orbiter and that's one reason that's why we landed discovery on this last flight. We landed back at
the lake bed because it was the first time we had flown that vehicle. I should say we've got
three vehicles delivered now. Challenger, Columbia, and Discovery and we are awaiting the delivery
in about March of next year of Atlantis which will give us four orbiters and then there is a
I guess I could call it a controversy at least a discussion on the possibility of building a fifth
orbiter but at about 1.7 billion per coffee in dollars that's it's a decision that is not going
to be easy for to get it and frankly I don't know whether we will or not. The four vehicle fleet
will support the flight rate that we have planned but there are some people that feel like a fifth
would give us some insurance and that's kind of what it falls on. On the structural side of this
vehicle now I go right onto the next slide. I wanted to point out one thing this vehicle is the
orbiter is literally built all over the United States and comes together at Palmdale, California to be
assembled. The wing for instance is built by Grumman. The mid-fusilized area that you see this whole
I mean you're right my pointer here. You see that. This whole area here is built by General Dynamics.
The payload bay doors are built by Rockwell, the crew cabin and the far-ducing lies are all
Rockwell with tails built by Fairchild. The homespods are built on McDonald's Douglas.
Literally all over the states we've got people building basic structure of this vehicle.
The words on that left hand chart pretty well explained the kind of technology that we use to build
the structure. It's pretty much basic airplane structure. We decided to do that and then cover it
with thermal protection. Aluminum will take generally in the area of 350 degrees temperature without
permanent deformation. So we had to design a thermal protection system that I'll talk about a
little bit later than insured its temperature at the aluminum would not exceed that 350 degrees.
And that's worked very well. On the right you see an exploded view and a visible looking inside
the structure. I put that there for reference to show you that it is basically a rib and stringer
type device. Now let's look at each major piece. Here's the forward fuselage
crew module. The crew module which is just this pressurized area here had to be built and isolated
from thermal deathbed formations because it is a pressure holding device. So it is fully welded
interglume machine panels that are that are completely welding. No bolts or anything holding it
together. The rest of the structure however and then that I should say too that that cabin
free floats inside the upper and lower forward fuselage has. In that it is isolated.
Its loads are taken out through the vertical and side longitudinal loads for instance.
There's two there's a fitting here and a fitting on the far side that looks something like
trunion devices that take loads in two directions. There's a pin here that will only take load in one
direction and it's allowed to rotate in any other that takes out the vertical. That associated
with the two trunions take out the vertical loads and then there's a lateral load fitting down here
in this area on each side that only takes out the lateral loads. So the crew module is inside this
outer shell if you will and isolated from the thermal death formations that are on the outside
skin. That was a real problem in the initial design because these wells are long they're big
and they were subject to a lot of manufacturing error early on and they we felt like they had to
be essentially perfect and indeed that's they've turned out to work very well. We've learned a lot
about it and in the crew module that we built for the Atlantis vehicle which will be delivered next
year the learning curve in those four builds was extreme took them much less time the first one
was tough and they had to redo many wells and they had a lot of engineering had a mostly associated
with manufacturing techniques just to make these rather long wells. That's come along very nicely
however in the last build. The F structure is very interesting and that's this this
oriental again here that's this area right here this has to of course the main engines fit into
there so there's a tremendous load placed on that structure. Now I've got two views of that this
one on the right is the more or less the outer skin view if you will and there's nothing too dynamic
here machined bulkheads and and interglomy machined skin in some cases but for the most part nothing
too exotic. It's when you turn around look at it from the other side and this is at the rear of
that F structure and those members are where they react all the loads for the main engine has
got to dump those loads into the rest of the orbiter structure to build and that's large it's hard
to tell here but it is extremely large piece of structure and we went to a diffusion bonding technique
titanium in this case and if you're familiar with diffusion bonding you put it in strips and put it
under pressure and heat until it flew the way I think of it as it flows smoothly and makes a a solid
homogeneous beam or our structural member. The the fact was is that in those days we could just not
get forging as large as we needed and that's why they went to diffusion bonding which is a very
expensive and in slow process if we build a fifth orbiter and in the fourth orbiter that's already
built those both in the 10 years it's taken us to develop shuttle we now have forging that we're
fitted so we've actually changed on 104 or I'm sorry Atlantis and 104 is a vehicle number we've
changed to to a forging for this F structure. The other thing we did is that we found out we could
I want to point out these boron epoxy tubular struts that's a bit of a myth in this
gnomer what we did we could save some weight by bonding boron epoxy composite on the outside of
the titanium structure and we saved as I recall the number about 20% in our weight by strengthening
the titanium with a bonded graphite or boron epoxy over the top of that's worked very well
and we think that in it's one of the things that we really think in future structural work that
we'll see more and more of them getting the metal out and using epoxy or I'm sorry composite
materials to to give you added strength. The F structure as you can imagine is a very
critical item we inspect this very carefully after each flight for cracks etc it's held up
extremely well and done well. Talk about some of the other mechanical systems I'm not going to go
into all the structure I want to talk about some of the other mechanical systems and this is where
I say earlier a mechanical engineer is delight we've got a lot of moving parts on this vehicle the
doors vents remote manipulators and landing gear etc and I want to talk about a couple of them
the talk about the main and the nose gears this is an interesting design it's very simple
it things get very simple when you only have one opportunity to land and you can't
there's no reason to have a retraction system because there's no ability to go around and so
we were able to design this system very simply very reliably it's really a gravity fall as all it is
you just hydraulically unlock the latches and there's some stored energy hydraulic
pistons that help shove the thing down and they all they all fold forward so that the air load also
helps to as you're moving helps to to drop them have worked very very well the one test that we
have yet to do we've used for steering only differential braking to date and we're going to
in the next flight or two engage nose wheel steering the reason we have and as we we have had
some problems in the in the control laws that this is a very heavy machine and a very small gear
and some of you that have dealt with airplanes on the same line we haven't needed nose wheels during
they could engage you anytime they need it but they haven't needed it they felt comfortable using
differential braking but this this system has worked extremely well and it's very simple very
reliable the the other system that I want another system I want to talk about is not many people
understand how important what I'm about to say is the if I can make this error work and we can see it
right here on the bottom of the orbiter is the only way we can get the liquid oxygen and liquid
hydrogen into the main engines we do that through these two doors we call it the ET closeout doors
and then those doors must close because that's one of the hotter areas of the vehicle on entry
so I can't in a line drawing explain to you exactly how the doors work but I can tell you they are
folded back from their closed position 180 degrees actually they're folded this way toward each other
there there's a device that that latches the two of them together because this has to go through
acid through this high dynamic dynamic pressure region and all without fluttering and coming apart
and then after the tank is saw is separated the doors are actuated closed all the way around and then
firmly hogged in and pulled in with latches to give a very tight seal so that you don't leak hot
gases in there during the entry it's something we can't see it must work the the crew actuates
these doors closed and they get some talkbacks that tell them that they're closed in the cockpit but
it's strictly trust that they indeed did close and close firmly so we've they spent a lot of
time these are brillium doors because they did not want them to deform and then they've got tile
actually glued onto them bonded to them that give you the thermal protection very very important
device and it's a little bit that could be for one of the nail if it didn't work right
she was lost in therefore the battle but i'm happy to report we've had no problems with that
the payload bay doors are very large they're 60 feet long they are made of graphite epoxy
and they are covered since this is a cool area of the vehicle they're covered with a no-mex blanket
on top just uh it looks well it looks like a blanket of no-mex there are four 15-foot panels on each side
and on the back side of the doors are the radiators that we we pump free on 21 through and pump it
through the cold plates where the avionics are and take out the the heat that's generated inside the
orbiter two of the radiator panels on each side can also be deployed and you see that in the left
hand you can also see it in the right hand version they can be differentially deployed from the
doors and that gives you radiation out both sides both surfaces and we have done that in orbit however
most of the heat loads that we have worked with we've been able to leave the two forward panels on
each side undeploied and when we don't have to have it we prefer not to because it's just one less
thing that could go wrong if you had to re-enter rather fast and you didn't have time to do an EVA
go out and cut the links there are contingency ways to get doors closed and all by going EVA
but you need a little time uh these devices have worked very well the other the area that we had
you're going to hear me say a little bit about it these latches around the air bulkhead here
there's some forward latches and the latches now in the center line were a real uh
kinematic problem of saw they worked well we've had one problem and I'll mention that in a
in just a minute I'll spend a few charts on the thermal protection system which is a subject
in itself for this vehicle maybe I should have said for to some of you that may not know this
vehicle is fully reusable and it's the first spaceship that we've ever built for that purpose
in fact it's first space ship that's ever been built anywhere for that purpose the
some interesting figures the mercury program, Germany, Apollo all used a blade even material
because it was a one-time use and it heated and sloughed off and that was it when we started
talking about the shuttle we had to do something that could be reusable without this giant turnaround
problem of trying to replace a bladers the decision was made to use a rigidized silica fiber
its glass you hold one of these tiles which is typically six inches or so square anywhere from two
to three inches in thickness and it feels like a piece of star foam it's very very light
and if you look at the next chart which is not a very good picture I wanted to try to get something
show you what the cross section looked like the rigidized fiber that's shown here this is a
microscopic view and and the rigidized fiber is a 99.6 percent pure silica and it's in a cut fiber
link that's mixed with liquid silica which we call ludox to make a slurry it is then pressed
into the right volume to get the density we want which is about nine pounds per cubic foot
and it's then baked at 2400 degrees for some length of time and it forms a very hard brick
of this very light material it's then machined with a mission of a milling machine
computerized to very tight tolerances because it must match a smoozer must make a smooth
service on the outside of the vehicle the the coating that we put over that because this is
very soft you can poke your finger into it is a liquid glass coating borosilicate by name which
doesn't mean much to me I don't know what it means much to you or not but it's borosilicate
and it is a liquid glass that makes it gives the tile a very hard surface you can poke through it
with a sharp fingernail or a screwdriver but it is it gives it a hard surface
uh and then these are bonded to the I'm not sure you have that sign it's bonded to the aluminum
uh directly the uh the tile is been in later vehicles replaced by quite a lot of what we call
advanced flexible reusable surface insulation after isy and that is a more of a blanket material
we could do that because in the earlier flights we had a lot of data taken on temperatures and as
most uh thermal engineers like most mechanical uh engineers there was some conservative estimates
made and we found some areas of the vehicle not as hot as we had expected so we were able to go
to this more clock like insulation but we were only able to catch uh discovery which we've just
flown N104 so what we've and Atlantis come so what we've got now is we've got a fleet of vehicles
that have different uh they look pretty much to the eyeball constant but there's actually quite a
lot of difference in the outside protection of thermal purposes the uh I know you can't read the
chart on the the left you can't read the fine numbers but that's a it's a picture of the upper
part of it is the lower surface view uh in on the top of that vehicle and the the bottom half of
that plan form is the upper surface view and those are isotherms that uh for the worst case design
mission that we can think of and let me just summarize by saying the lower lower forward fuselage
right up in the chin area is the hottest that peaks up around 2300 degrees uh the lower wing is
about 2,000 the lower body flaps that around that same 2400 you'll see some higher figures on this
chart but again that's this extreme design mission that we that we've designed our system to I
don't think we'll ever see it um there are hotter temperatures and if you look on the next chart
the reinforced carbon carbon is used on the very tip of the nose on the leading edge of the wing
primarily and those areas are greater than 2300 degrees and there we had to go to this
reinforced carbon carbon it's a laminated structure it's coated with silicon carbide
to keep it from oxidizing and we are slowly trying to let me say lighten those panels by
several techniques and I think in in the future we will be able to go back and retrofit
those leading edge panels in the nose with lighter material that composite high-spring
um technology is growing by leaps and bounds as most of you are probably aware and there are
some materials now that are beginning to look very promising but the reinforced carbon carbon
has worked very very well on the bottom of the vehicle look at the top half of the right hand
picture there where it says lower surface is most all black tile the black tile is got the coating
it's a glass coating as I mentioned earlier but it takes the higher temperatures it'll take
the between 1200 and and about 2300 degrees temperature the crosshatch area on the if you look
at the bottom half of the top chart on the right or the top platform is mostly white tile and
that tile has a different coating which is a little lighter and it's good from about 700 to 1200
degrees and that's in the area that's the area where we have replaced a lot of that material on 103
I'm sorry I used the vehicle numbers on discovery and in lannis we have replaced a lot of that
white tile with this flexible claw and then we've got a few places where we had to use metallic
closeouts because we just couldn't do it any other way now next chart the tile is laid up like
this the one on the right incidentally the shot on the right here is the bottom of the vehicle as
is being hoisted in the vertical assembly building and I showed it just to I threw it in here it's a
little dark but to show you that that's all black tile that's all the high insulation tile and you
can see although you can't see the detail that's this area where the external tank doors that have
to get closed properly are on the open here because we're getting ready to make it to the external
tank on the left you will see the the tile the way it's put together it's these are about six
inch blocks the reason the these things have no essentially flexibility to them but the skin
had to give so they're put together with a certain gap in a certain step in there step tolerance
between one tile to the next very tight and we did that so that the tile could could move if you
will and we had to put the gap in because if we didn't they were buddy that together as they bent
they would break on each other so we the gap was varies from about 45,000ths of an inch to about
20,000ths of an inch the step tolerance depends on which view you decide the vehicle you're on
before it says step here on the on the upper portion of this right in here if you see that
varies those tolerances vary from about 17,000 to 50,000ths and again depending on the heat
influx there it's bonded let me the aluminum is first painted with RTV standard pretty much
standard RTV adhesive there's then a strain isolation pad and that's a no-max pad
it's roughly 10th of an inch thicker so and that's in order to let the vehicle flex again without
breaking the bond that's put on next and then RTV is painted on top of that and the tile is bonded
onto to the to the RTV there so you have you have aluminum you have RTV you have a strain isolation
pad RTV and then the tile we bond these things and then we do pull test on them and we actually
listen with a highly sensitive sonic device to see if we can hear any breaking and there's a certain
number of and I don't know the number but it's a certain number of clicks per second that is acceptable
frankly it makes me nervous to have any clicks but but there is an acceptable standard that as you
start to pull on it and they listen with a sonic device after it's cured it has to pass an inspection
we have had super luck after we got past the first vehicle with this technique the first technique
or the the first vehicle was very much of a learning experience many many errors made and as a matter
of fact Columbia had essentially all of its tiles 32,000 of them put on it one time they all came off
and and not at once but we kept finding problems and we took them all off and put them back on again
and that's one reason the shuttle was it's probably the primary reason the shuttle was 18 months to two
years late getting off the ground because of the tile problem the other vehicles have gone very very
easily and I think this is one that's behind us the I might just mention discovery in Atlantis the
last two orbiters have only 21,000 tile on them the 102 or Columbia and Challenger had over 30,000
so we've made quite an improvement in getting away from the the detail the replacement of these tiles
okay let's look at some typical problems that we've had and this is certainly not all of them
and I do this with little trepidation my friends in the American press tend to hang around in this area a
lot and many of the things that that I'm going to show you here have been relatively minor some not
some minor and but all in all I think we've learned a great deal from solving these things
one that you wouldn't think of and this I'll have to orient you a little bit you're looking at
the launch pad and you'll remember that I told you that as we put this mobile launcher down
this is these are the flame trenches this is where the solid rocket loosters exhausts our gases
down into the flame trench and on STS-1 when we flew it the first time we got a tremendous
resurgence of energy from when the SRB is ignited to the point that it completely it popped and
buckled the F-teach shield around the main engines the engines bells were all knocked around and so
forth and it was we had had to extrapolate from a one six scale model and we missed it by a lot
so what we did and it was obvious the pictures of the lift off of STS-1 the detail engineering
pictures in this area were frightening because you could see the engine bells deform and you
could see the F-teach shield pop a couple of times so a very simple solution this was laid
this in focus at Johnson and at the Kennedy Space Center this is a close-up you can see it not too
well here this is before we put this device in but here these are water troughs and let me go to
the next slide and I'll show you this is parachute type material and that's water you see in
there about a foot deep that we just laid across the hole and the purpose is is that when the SRB
is ignited you absorb that energy with this water it just blows this stuff completely away it's gone
almost vaporizes it but it was a very simple fix we wrestled with all kinds of ways to to absorb
that energy so that it would not go all the way down to the bottom of the flame trench and rebound
into the orbiter and as it turns out this is worked very nicely I was strictly skeptical of this
I didn't think it would work at all but the engineers kept running the figures and they said yeah
yeah it works so sure enough we tried it and it has now we've got some very exotic ways to fix it
later with water sprays and all that sort of thing but this thing works so well and it's so
inexpensive I suspect we'll be stuck with this for a long time it's very reliable
but again it's a it's a problem that you wouldn't even think about and there's no way as most of you
have that have been involved in trying to scale large things when you try to scale them down or
when you take something small about scale it out scaling errors can really get to you and that's
what that's what really happened here okay here was a problem we had on STS 3 and STS 4
3rd and 4th fire the shuttle we tried to close the payload bay doors and
lo and behold the first time they tried it there was an interference and it didn't work
and as a matter of fact the latches on that afbal kid which is this area right in here would not
make up they would not the door was not down far enough to make up the fellows looked at it
Thailand said now what have we done to this vehicle well we had some some reasons to be in a tail
sun attitude tail looking at the sun for a long long period and then we also had a reason to be
no sun attitude and what had happened is the vehicle had gotten very cold on the top and it actually
made the orbiter if I can exaggerate a bit shaped a little bit like a banana like this same thing
happened on STS 4 due to another factor and I'll show you behind a minute but all we had to do
is we just rotated the vehicle and exposed it to the sun for about four hours in the vehicle
straight and back out and then we could get the doors closed since then we are very careful to
ensure that that we do the proper thermal conditioning prior to entry to make sure that the
the vehicle is pretty much straight let me go to the next subject another problem
now this is one that in our press and I don't know what you've had it over here now but our press
has completely blown this quote problem out of out of proportion and it's most of you that are
probably dealt with large aircraft with small gears breaks our problem because you've got to
dissipate an awful lot of energy into some fairly small area this system those statters there's
three of them the rotors there's four and they rotate concurrently inside each other and then
there's eight pucks that is just a big disc brake eight pucks push on one side and there are four
pucks on each of two hydraulic systems so in case you lose a hydraulic system you still got
half your brakes and what has happened is we've never had a problem with the brakes stopping the
vehicle they've always stopped the vehicle fine but it is a turnaround problem because we were
picking up damage to the to the rotors primarily and I'll show you a picture one and it's a turnaround
issue we've had to take the brakes off every time we've flown and take a look at them and expect them
carefully we've made a few changes one of the problems was that axle was deflecting
quite a lot it was putting some funny torques into the rotors and statters so we've stiffened
that up with some saddles and we're seeing less and less damage all the time in fact the last flight
which this is not a picture but the last flight we saw virtually no damage at all you can see here a
clip and I'm going to show you different being a minute but there's a clip meant right here these
these are the rotors one two three four and one of these clips here is bent I'll show you a picture
from the side now this looks pretty bad these are burillion discs and they are faced with with
carbon to between the pads if you will and this was the worst break with the worst rotor that we
had you can see that the burillion actually here I can't get my barrel that how is that going
off right here actually broke and we had another brake here in the burillion we had a number of clips
and all that were destroyed but even on this flight the braking weren't just fine and in fact
it's all contained so it can't go anywhere but it is a turnaround issue we think we're on the
that's one that we haven't completely fixed yet on the last flight we had just a little bit of
galling on this on these carbon facing plates if you will and we had a couple of rivets that had
broken but that's one of the when I say a year from now I think we'll have some of the nagging things
taken out I think that's one of the ones that will get completely solved now the next one is an
interesting one I use the shot on the left here just to show you where it's a little bit like being
up close to an elephant you can't tell what you're looking at right here is the area that on the
first flight we received a big surprise it's on that ohm's pod there's the pod and right at the
base of this right here which this is the vehicle sitting on the ground if you look right here you'll
see a discolored area these ohm's pods are also graphite skined graphite epoxy skin now let me get
you should move you on a little bit closer there's the corner of the pod and there was flow coming
evidently during the entry flow was coming up through this body flap area and impinging hot gas
in a way we didn't think was going to happen this caused delamination of the graphite epoxy
quite a bit of burning although it didn't cause any any structural damage inside we did have to
cut that whole section out of this ohm's pod we had to remove the pod and they're just now getting
it back to service they had to cut it out and replay lay up the the graphite epoxy again and the way
we fixed it is that we just placed 25 we put 25 tile in this area we didn't try to stop the
flow that would have required a major design redesign or some type but we just covered this area with
with tile black tile and it hasn't been a problem since another problem we had looking at the
rear end of the vehicle sitting on the ground there is a nozzle right here a thruster we call it
a vernier thruster and it's very low thrust it's only 25 pound is a 25 pounder these big primary
thrusters for controlling attitude or 875 pounders and we really don't use them very much
except near the entry on orbit they're just they're like somebody hits the vehicle with a hammer
every time they fire they're just they're large and they're powerful so we use these little 25 pound
vernier thrusters and this thing exhaust this is one of the down firing thrusters out of this
own spot and it exhausts down and if you can see a light area right in here on this is the body
flap and you these are black tile back in here and you can see a light area and if you look over here
you can see where this exhaust products were hitting on top of the body flap and it was peeling off
the it was just literally taking the coating off the off the tile so what we did very simple fix
again to show you don't always have to be really excited we just have in later vehicles we
butter if you will our TV 10th of an inch thick over the top of this entire area right in here
and just let the stuffing pinch and the rtv protects the coating of the tile and
and it lines up being a super fix with very simple process they just painted on almost like a brush
and we look at it each flight and inspect it and then replace it if we have to we have another tile problem
this is meant to be a continuous picture so I didn't quite make it if you'll notice here on
sds 2 there's there's actually six coatings on tiles this was sitting on the lake bed after the
landing one two three four five six before this flight we had some particularly heavy rain and we had
used essentially scotch guard to waterproof the tiles in fact it's it was actually done out of
spray cans which was the technique we were going to use because it was simple we knew we after
the heat of reentry it burns off the scotch guards so we knew that we would have to to do something
flight to flight but we got it scotch guard and then we found out that it you know we had some very
very heavy rain hold we're sitting on the pad and what happened is we actually trapped we got a
little leakage in some tiles and we trapped some water under the coating and then in the mission during
the mission this area because of the attitude we were in got down below minus 100 degrees f
and with the freezing of that water with no way to get out quickly it literally popped the top
off these black tile I got a picture of the close up here you can you can see how it just peeled off the
the coating and very jagged shapes and it was because of the trapped water and what we've done since then
is we developed a new method of waterproofing and we actually waterproof internal to the tile
we actually went around and on each tile put a hyperdermic type of needle through the coating
very small hole and injected hexa-methyl dizalazine and all of that means anything to you either it
doesn't make but I tried to find a commercial main point there isn't it but this material actually
is absorbed by the tile through the small hole and we're using the same hole each flight now there's
actually a machine that goes through and and puts this thing in and it's actually worked very well
as rapid it's they can they can do it very fast again you just can't stand now that it on this
leading edge if you look closer it got hot enough that there's some swamping of the tile but it
didn't hurt anything behind it there are some areas particularly in that chin area where you couldn't
take this kind of damage but you could take it and it would do some damage you probably live through
but you sure would hurt the vehicle in the process final very own tile if you look on the left in
this area this looks a little bit like salt and pepper area and what here what happened is sitting
on the pad the night before we were to launch STS-4 we had a typical Florida hailstorm and it
actually was enough to crack this coating on these tiles and and this is pretty much what it
looked like before we launched we it would have been a terrible thing to have to stop and repair
all this tile so what we did and this is a shot on the bottom side and it looks kind of messy but
it worked we actually painted with this liquid silica lute ox just painted over it to kind of
give it a glass finish it was mostly clear and as a result it came through the entry just fine
all of our thermal experts said it wouldn't it did and we ended up out of all this hail damage
only having to replace two tiles and we did we paired the rest of them in place with a black coating
after the flight one more subject on tile I'm sorry did have one more and this was in an area
between the elevon on this vehicle is split and we knew there was going to be hot glass
gases flowing through here so we went to an ablater because the estimates were the temperature
was going to get hot enough and you can see actually it really ablated in here and then but we found
that some of the fellows thought that we could replace that and we did on later vehicles and we
now retrofit them all with with some high density tile slightly higher than nine pounds per square
foot and they did it up we saved $550,000 of flight and quite a bit of weight that's a good kind
of problem so I didn't cause anything to save us some money in summary I think that that we've
got a system the space shuttle that works very well and I think it's going to get from here on
nothing but better I mentioned that we were in an infant stage we've launched 12 flights since 1981
we launched 12 more in the next 12 months we're going to be flying once a month for the next 12
months if we can all keep our sanity and our families and everything else from going crazy
it'll be an interesting year for us we're planning to go to a 24 flight rate per year in 1986
87 time frame so about every payday we'll be launching a mission shuttle mission in the space
and that's a terrible thought to think of having to do it that often but we're ready for it
I guess one person might some person people might ask why you doing it and well for one thing we
think it's a very capable and flexible system but there's another reason and that is and I'm just
going to tickle you with this one I'm not going to talk much about it but that's because of this
device the space station this is the this is hot off the press as I left Houston I brought it with me
shows an orbiter dock to what we think is going to be close to the final configuration for space
station we call it the power tower because it's a rather long a long spine if you will that holds
solar panels radiators these are radiators right here to radiate the heat and all the living modules
are down in this area there's a large communication platform you see the shuttle docked up to it here
with the space station I think we'll have the infrastructure established for a truly operational
system shuttle without station and station without shuttle really don't mix too well in fact they're
not either one of them are ends in themselves but together they form a very very capable
thing for the for the free world to have as a unit we will use this thing as a waste station
we will station satellites there to be later launched on to higher altitudes we will use it for
a scientific observatory we'll use it for metals or materials testing and we'll use it for
maintaining a preeminence in a free world for for space technology I was telling someone
earlier this afternoon with the shuttle we pretty well kind of built the the highway if you will
and now we've got to build some some filling stations petrol stations and we've got to build some
places to stop and do some things without just these little short bursts of of man flight certainly
the Russians are doing that they're they're breached strengthening it they're doing it with breached
strength but they are pretty much living in space now all along and they are learning a great deal
I know they must be and we feel that it's imperative that we do the same thing the
international involvement on the space station is going to be great the in by that I mean large
the president has invited international participation from our friends we're seeing a lot of
interest generated amongst the east of states east as an organization and at least from from
Germany as a unilateral let me say push the Japanese are are very interested in a very aggressive
they're spending a lot of time with us in Houston I hope that the UK will take the same steps
this country in my thinking has been a a engineering leader for many many years
you've had some of the best ideas you've had some of the best minds put together to do things
it would really be I think good for us it would be good for the pre-world to use your brain power
in building a device like this it's probably a 30 to 50 year facility and that's it should be
thought of as a facility it's not a spaceship and we need to breast best best brains that we can
bring to bear on the subject I know that many of you are are pushing in that direction I know
there's like in our country that's never easy to push these kind of rather far reaching ideas
but I hope that that there is some impetus amongst the technical community that can convince the
political community in your country to participate in a large way and we would welcome your participation
and hope we see it with that I will close and I thank you very much
we are goal for main engine start 8 7 6 we have main engine start 3 2 1 solid motor ignition
and lift off lift off a challenger in the first flight to repair a satellite in space to
clear the challenge